>> Ifill: AMERICA'S FROSTY
RELATIONS WITH RUSSIA GREW
CHILLIER TODAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SCRAPPED A
PLANNED SUMMIT IN SEPTEMBER,
WITH RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT,
EDWARD SNOWDEN'S ASYLUM, SYRIA
AND MORE ARE ALL WEIGHING ON
U.S.-RUSSIA RELATIONS.
WE DISSECT WHAT'S BEHIND TODAY'S
DIPLOMATIC REBUKE.
>> Ifill: THEN, A SWEEPING
OVERHAUL OF THE NATION'S
MORTGAGE FINANCE SYSTEM.ARET WAE
PRESIDENT'S LATEST HOUSING PLAN.
>> Brown: MANY PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES STILL DON'T GET
HOME-BASED OR COMMUNITY
SERVICES.
JUDY WOODRUFF REPORTS ON THE
STRUGGLE TO FULLY IMPLEMENT A
LANDMARK CIVIL RIGHTS LAW.
>> THINK ABOUT IT AS
SEGREGATION.
PEOPLE ARE STILL SEGREGATED.
IT'S WRONG, IT'S WRONG MORALLY,
ECONOMICALLY AND IT'S WRONG IN
COMPLIANCE WITH AMERICANS WITH
DISBILL TEETH ACTS.
>> Ifill: TEMPERS OFTEN FLARE AS
THE TEMPERATURE OUTSIDE RISES.
COULD CLIMATE CHANGE BE MAKING
US MORE VIOLENT?
RAY SUAREZ DIVES INTO THE
DETAILS OF A NEW STUDY.
>> Brown: AND A POWERFUL DRAMA
BASED ON E TRTHUE STORY OF ONE
MAN'S LAST DAY, BEFORE BEING
FATALLY SHOT ON AN OAKLAND
SUBWAY.
WE SIT DOWN WITH THE DIRECTOR OF
"FRUITVALE STATION".
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
CALLED OFF NEXT MONTH'S PLANNED
MEETING WITH RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
PUTIN.
THAT ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY
UNDERSCORED THE DAMAGE DONE BY
THE DISPUTE OVER EDWARD SNOWDEN.
FOR THE RECORD, THE STATEMENT--
POSTED ON THE WHITE HOUSE
WEBSITE-- SAID U.S. OFFICIALS
COULD NOT JUSTIFY A MEETING OF
THE PRESIDENTS.
STATE DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN JEN
PSAKI ELABORATED:
>> MAJOR ISSUES WERE NOT TEED UP
TO MAKE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS ON
THE LEVEL OF A PRESIDENT TO
PRESIDENT SUMMIT.
THAT WASN'T A CONSTRUCTIVE STEP
TO TAKE AT THIS POINT, BUT THERE
>> Ifill: BUT IT WAS CLEAR THE
EDWARD SNOWDEN AFFAIR WAS THE
DRIVING FORCE BEHIND THE
DECISION TO CANCEL THE SUMMIT.
LAST WEEK, THE KREMLIN GRANTED
ASYLUM TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY LEAKER, IN SPITE OF U.S.
DEMANDS THAT HE BE HANDED OVER
TO FACE ESPIONAGE CHARGES.
LAST NIGHT, IN AN APPEARANCE ON
THE "TONIGHT SHOW WITH JAY
LENO,"  PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID
THAT WAS THE WRONG DECISION.
>> I WAS DISAPPOINTED BECAUSE,
YOU KNOW, EVEN THOUGH WE DON'T
HAVE AN EXTRADITION TREATY WITH
THEM, TRADITIONALLY WE HAVE
TRIED TO RESPECT IF THERE'S A
LAW BREAKER OR ALLEGED LAW
BREAKER IN THEIR COUNTR WEY,
EVALUATE IT, AND WE TRY TO WORK
WITH THEM.
>> Ifill: AND TODAY'S WHITE
HOUSE STATEMENT ACKNOWLEDGED THE
SNOWDEN MATTER WAS INDEED "ALSO
A FACTOR THAT WE CONSIDERED IN
ASSESSING THE CURRENT STATE OF
OUR BILATERAL RELATIONSHIP. "
IN THE LENO INTERVIEW, THE
PRESIDENT GAVE THE RUSSIANS
CREDIT FOR COOPERATION IN THE
BOSTON BOMBING INVESTIGATION AND
OTHER AREAS, BUT, HE SAID:
>> BUT THERE HAVE BEEN TIMES
WHERE THEY SLIP BACK INTO COLD
WAR THINKING AND A COLD WAR
MENTALITY, AND WHAT I
CONSISTENTLY SAY TO THEM AND
WHAT I SAY TO PRESIDENT PUTIN IS
THAT'S THE PAST, AND WE'VE GOT
TO THINK ABOUT THE FUTURE, AND
THERE'S NO REASON WHY WE
SHOULDN'T BE ABLE TO COOPERATE
MORE EFFECTIVELY THAN WE DO.
>> Ifill: TENSIONS IN THE OBAMA-
PUTIN RELATIONSHIP WERE CLEARLY
EVIDENT AT THE G-8 SUMMIT IN
IRELAND LAST JUNE, AFTER THEY
CLASHED OVER SYRIA.
TODAY, KREMLIN OFFICIALS
EXPRESSED THEIR OWN
DISAPPOINTMENT AT THE U.S.
DECISION TO FOREGO THE SUMMIT.
BUT THEY SAID PRESIDENT PUTIN'S
INVITATION STILL STANDS.
MR. OBAMA STILL PLANS TO AENDTT
THE G-20 GATHERING IN ST.
PETERSBURG, NEXT MONTH, BUT HAS
ADDED A SIDE VISIT TO SWEDEN
INSTEAD.
AND SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AND DEFENSE SECRETARY
CHUCK HAGEL WILL MEET WITH THEIR
RUSSIAN COUNTERPARTS IN
WASHINGTON ON FRIDAY.
>> Brown: WAS THE PRESIDENT
RIGHT TO CANCEL THE MEETING?
AND WHERE DOES THIS LEAVE U.S.-
RUSSIAN RELATIONS?
STEPHEN SESTANOVICH TEACHES
INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
HE SERVED IN THE STATE
DEPARTMENT DURING THE REAGAN AND
CLINTON ADMINISTRATIONS.
DIMITRI SIMES IS PRESIDENT OF
THE CENTER FOR THE NATIONAL
INTEREST.
HE JUST RETURNED FROM A TRIP TO
RUSSIA WHERE HE MET WITH SENIOR
RUSSIAN OFFICIALS.
WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
STEPHEN SESTANOVICH WAS IT THE
SNOWDEN ASYLUM IN THE END THAT
LED TO THIS AND DO YOU THINK IT
WAS THE RIGHT MOVE.
>> I THINK IT WAS A KEY FACTOR
IN THE DECISION BUT IT WASN'T
THE MOST IMPORTANT ISSUE.
WHAT IT DID WAS FORCE THE
ADMINISTRATION TO TAKE CAREFUL
STOCK OF WHERE THE RELATIONSHIP
STOOD.
WHAT'S GOING ON THEY HAD TO ASK,
AND IS THIS MEETING GOING TO BE
A LOSER.
I THINK THEY WERE RIGHT TO
CONCLUDE IT WAS GOING TO BE A
LOSER.
THAT IT WAS GOING TO BE A WASTE
OF TIME, AT BEST, AND AT WORST.
>> Brown:  YOU TOLD ONE OF OUR
PRODUCERS EARLIER TODAY YOU
THINK PRESIDENT OBAMA MISHANDLED
THE SITUATION WITH PUTIN OVER
SNOWDEN.
EXPLAIN WHAT YOU MEAN BY THAT
AND IS THAT HOW RUSSIAN
OFFICIALS THAT YOU'VE TALKED TO
FELT.
>> WELL, SNOWDEN CAME TO RUSSIA
NOT AS INVITATION OF THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT.
ACTUALLY FROM WHAT I WAS TOLD,
AND IT WAS CONFIRMED TO ME BY
U.S. OFFICIALS, THAT THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT HAVE INFORMED THE
RUSSIANS ABOUT SNOWDEN BEING ON
A PLANE FROM HONG KONG TO MOSCOW
ONLY WHEN THE PLANE HAD ALREADY
LEFT HONG KONG.
SO SNOWDEN WAS TRAVELING TO
CUBA.
HE WAS SUPPOSED TO BOARD A PLANE
TO CUBA, A RUSSIAN PLANE NEXT
DAY.
THEN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT GOES TO
THE CUBANS AND DESPITE A RATHER
DIFFICULT RELATIONSHIP, THE
CUBANS DECIDED TO TALK WITH THE
UNITED STATES AND NOT ALLOW
SNOWDEN TO GO VIA CUBA.
SO HERE IS SNOWDEN AT THE
RUSSIAN AIRPORT.
HE'S THERE FOR LESS THAN SIX
HOURS AND THE SECRETARY OF STATE
ALREADY WAS WITH PUTIN ABOUT
CONSEQUENCES.
AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT ALREADY
EXPRESS A STRONG CONSENT.
AND SENATOR SCHUMER WANTS PUTIN
ABOUT ARE TERRIBLE IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE RELATIONSHIP AND SAYS
THAT PUTIN PUT THE KNIFE IN THE
AMERICAN BACK.
>> Brown:  TO FAST FORWARD TO
TODAY'S ACTION, THIS SCENE IN
RUSSIA AS A CLEAR DIPLOMATIC
SLIGHT.
>> I THINK THAT THE WAY IT IS
SEEN IN RUSSIA AS A LOGICAL
PROGRESSION OF THIS SITUATION,
THEY OBVIOUSLY ARE NOT HAPPY
THAT IT WAS CONSULT.
AT THE SAME TIME I THINK
EVERYBODY RECOGNIZES THAT UNDER
THE CIRCUMSTANCES THAT WAS THE
RIGHT DECISION.
INCLUDING FROM THE RUSSIAN
STANDPOINT.
BECAUSE PRESIDENT OBAMA CAME TO
MOSCOW UNDER THE CURRENT
CIRCUMSTANCES WITH ALL THIS
MEDIA CRITICISM, PRESSURE FROM
THE HILL, HE WOULD HAVE TO
CONDUCT HIMSELF IN A WAY THAT IS
A SERIOUS NEGOTIATING WOULD BE
IMPOSSIBLE.
>> Brown:  WE HEAR THE
PRESIDENT ON JAY LENO AND HE'S
ALMOST CHIDING RUSSIANS FOR A
COLD WAR MENTALITY.
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT.
WHAT DOES THAT TELL YOU ABOUT
THE STATE OF THING?
>> I THINK PUTIN RADIATES A COLD
WAR MENTALITY SO A LOT OF OTHER
PEOPLE HAVE COME TO THAT
CONCLUSION.
I'M NOT SURE IT'S THE BEST MOVE
TO THROW THAT IN HIS FACE.
THERE ARE MANY OTHER FACTORS
PRODUCING THIS.
BUT I THINK IT'S CLEARLY THE WAY
THE PRESIDENT READS THE
RELATIONSHIP RIGHT NOW AND READS
PUTIN'S VIEW OF THE
RELATIONSHIP.
HE SEES PUTIN AND ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS ACROSS THE BOARD SEE
THIS AS BLOCKING ANY KIND OF
REAL PROGRESS ON A WHOLE HOST OF
ISSUES.
>> Brown:  WHAT ARE THE OTHER
ISSUES THAT ARE MOST IMPORTANT
IN THIS RELATIONSHIP?
>> WELL THERE ARE TWO SETS, IN
ADDITION TO SNOWDEN.
THE BILATERAL GEO POLITICAL
ISSUES, SYRIA, IRAN, MISSAL
DEFENSE, NUCLEAR ARMS
REDUCTIONS.
THERE ARE, IN ADDITION TO THAT,
ARE THE INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS IN
RUSSIA THAT MAKE IT EMBARRASSING
FOR AN AMERICAN PRESIDENT TO BE
SHOULDER TO SHOULDER WITH PUTIN
WITHOUT AS DIMITRI SUES HAVING
TO DUKE IT OUT WITH HIM.
>> Brown:  FROM THE RUSSIAN
VIEW IS SOMETHING LIKE THIS SEEN
AS A BELOW TO PUTIN IN THE SENSE
IT DENIES HIM IN THIS BIG
MOMENT.
>> NO.
>> Brown:  OR IS IT IN FACT
BOOST HIM BECAUSE IT LOOKS LIKE
HE STUCK TO HIS GUNS.
>> IT LOOKS LIKE -- OBAMA GOES
TO THE WHITEHOUSE THAT HE WOULD
GO.
THERE WILL BE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
COVER A MEETING AT THE SIDELINES
AT THE SUMMIT.
THE WHITEHOUSE SAID THAT SUCH A
MEETING WAS NOT PLAN.
OF COURSE IT WAS NOT PLANNED AT
THIS POINT.
>> Brown:  IT'S POSSIBLE YOU
THINK.
>> I THINK BETWEEN U.S. AND
RUSSIAN SENIOR OFFICIALS IS
PRODUCTIVE I THINK WOULD BE VERY
DIFFICULT TO AVOID A DISCUSSION
BETWEEN PUTIN OBAMA IN ST.
PETER'SBERG IS NOT A BIG DEAL.
>> I AGREE WITH EVERY SPECIFIC
POINT HE MADE ABOUT PROBLEMS
WITH THE U.S. RUSSIAN
RELATIONSHIP.
BUT THERE'S A MORE FUNDAMENTAL
PROBLEM AND THIS IS A PROBLEM
THAT APPEARS WITH POLICY NOT
ONLY WITH THE RUSSIANS BUT IN
GENERAL.
I THINK AT THE END OF THE COLD
WAR WERE OFTEN DEVELOPED A MIND
SET THAT WHERE IS ONLY SUPER
POWER BUT WHERE MASTER OF THE
UNIVERSE.
AND A DOZEN NATIONS INCLUDING
THE GREAT POWERS I EXPECT TO
TALK ABOUT -- AND ONCE THEY
DON'T DO IT AS IN THE CASE OF
THE SNOWDEN AFFAIR, WE TAKE IT
VERY VERY -- THAT IS NOT
HELPFUL.
ALL FOREIGN POLICY
EFFECTIVENESS.
>> Brown:  THE PUTS IT IN A
MUCH GRANDER SCALE.
WHAT'S YOUR REACTION TO A
STATEMENT LIKE THAT.
>> I DON'T THINK PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S NORTHERN POLICY IS A
MASTER OF THE UNIVERSE FOREIGN
POLICY.
AND I DON'T THINK HE HAS TREATED
THE RUSSIAN ACCOUNT THAT WAY.
HE'S ACTUALLY APPROACHED IT IN A
PRETTY TRANSACTIONAL WAY TRYING
TO MAKE PROGRESS ON SPECIFIC
ISSUES.
AND ALTHOUGH IT'S CLEAR THERE'S
NO PARTICULAR LOVE LOST BETWEEN
HIM AND PUTIN, I THINK THE VIEW
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION HAD WHEN
PUTIN CAME BACK WAS WELL LET'S
SEE WHAT WE CAN DO WITH THIS
GUY.
AND THEY BUILT TOWARD THIS
MEETING WITH THE IDEA THAT IF
YOU CAN MAKE PROGRESS ON SERIOUS
ISSUES, IT WILL BE WORTH HAVING
A MEETING.
BUT THEY HAVE BEEN STUFFED,
STIFFED ESSENTIALLY FOR THE
WHOLE OF THIS YEAR.
>> Brown:  SO HOW WOULD YOU
CHARACTERIZE TODAY THE U.S.
RUSSIAN RELATIONSHIP.
>> PRETTY EMPTY.
>> Brown:  EMPTY.
>> YES.
IT'S A CORE OF SUBSTANCE THAT
COULD BE THERE THAT IS NOW
MISSING AND VERY NEGATIVE
ATMOSPHERIC RELATING TO INTERNAL
DEVELOPMENTS IN RUSSIA AND BAD
PERSONAL VIBES.
WHAT MORE DO YOU WANT.
>> Brown:  HOW WOULD YOU
CHARACTERIZE IT?
>> EMPTY.
GOING DOWN AT THE EXPENSE OF
VERY IMPORTANT NATION SECURITY
IN TERMS OF THE UNITED STATES.
IT WAS A POTENTIAL AMERICAN
LIGHT AS WE HAVE SEEN IN THE
CASE WHEN IN ABSENCE OF ADEQUATE
SECURITY DIALOGUE WITH RUSSIA
LED WHICH WAS AVOIDABLE.
>> VERY SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES.
SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES AND WE
SHOULD DO BETTER BUT UNDER THE
CIRCUMSTANCES I'M GLAD THAT IT
WAS CONSULT.
>> Brown:  THANK YOU BOTHERY V
MUCH.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": CHANGING HOW WE PAY
FOR OUR HOMES; PROTECTING THE
RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES; HOT TEMPERS IN A
WARMER WORLD AND THE GRIPPING
FILM THAT CAPTURES ONE MAN'S
FINAL HOURS.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THEAY. D
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: A MILITARY JUDGE IN
TEXAS TODAY TEMPORARILY HALTED
THE MASS SHOOTING COURT MARTIAL
OF ARMY MAJOR NIDAL HASAN AFTER
JUST ONE DAY.
HASAN IS DEFENDING HIMSELF, BUT
HIS STANDBY ATTORNEY SAID HE
APPEARS INTENT ON GETTING
SENTENCED TO DEATH.
THE LAWYER ASKED THAT HIS OWN
ROLE BE MINIMIZED.
HASAN HAS ADMITTED KILLING 13
PEOPLE AND WOUNDING NEARLY THREE
DOZEN IN 2009.
HE SAYS HE ACTED BECAUSE AMERICA
IS AT WAR WITH ISLAM.
THE TRIAL IS EXPECTED TO
RECONVENE TOMORROW.
THE DEADLY ASSAULT ON THE U.S.
CONSULATE IN BENGHAZI, LIBYA HAS
PRODUCED ITS FIRST CRIMINAL
CHARGES.
IT WAS WIDELY REPORTED OVERNIGHT
THAT U.S. PROSECUTORS HAVE BEGUN
THE PROCESS OF BRINGING SUSPECTS
TO TRIAL.
WORD OF THE CHARGES COMES ALMOST
A YEAR AFTER THE ATTACK IN
BENGHAZI, THAT KILLED AMBASSADOR
CHRIS STEVE ANDNS THREE OTHER
AMERICANS.
IT'S UNCLEAR HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE
INCLUDED IN THE SEALED
COMPLAINT, OR WHAT THE CHARGES
ARE, BUT THE REPORTS NAME AHMED
ABU KHATTALA, THE FORMER
COMMANDER OF A BENGHAZI-BASED
MILITIA GROUP.
KHATTALA HAS DENIED INVOLVEMENT
IN THE PAST, AND DID SO AGAIN
TODAY.
HE INSISTED HE'S LEFT THE
MILITIA GROUP AND THAT HE HAS
NOT BEEN QUESTIONED IN THE CASE.
IN WASHINGTON, THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT REFUSED TO COMMENT,
EXCEPT TO SAY THE INVESTIGATION
IS ONGOING.
BUT REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN
DARRELL ISSA OF CALIFORNIA SAID
ANYONE CHARGED MUST BE PLACED IN
U.S. CUSTODY WITHOUT DELAY.
ISSA AND OTHER REPUBLICANS HAVE
ACCUSED THE ADMINISTRATION OF
NEGLECTING SECURITY IN BENGHAZI
AND MISLEADING THE PUBLIC ABOUT
WHAT REALLY HAPPENED.
AUTHORITIES IN YEMEN SAID TODAY
THEY'VE FOILED AN AL-QAEDA PLOT
TO TAKE OVER STRATEGIC PORT
CITIES IN THE SOUTH.
THEY CLAIMED IT'S THE SAME PLOT
THAT LED THE U.S. TO CLOSE
EMBASSIES IN 19 CITIES ACROSS
THE MUSLIM WORLD.
MEANWHILE, ANOTHER SUSPECTED
U.S. DRONE STRIKE TODAY KILLED
SEVEN AL QAEDA MILITANTS IN
SOUTHERN YEMEN'S SHABWA
PROVINCE.
IN EGYPT, THE MILITARY-BACKED
LEADERS DECLARED  FOREIGN
EFFORTS TO MEDIATE THE COUNTRY'S
POLITICAL CRISIS HAVE FAILED.
THEY BLAMED THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD, WHICH BACKS
MOHAMMED MORSI, THE OUSTED
PRESIDENT WHO REMAINS IN
CUSTODY.
EGYPT'S INTERIM PRIME MINISTER
WENT ON STATE T.V. TO WARN
ISLAMIST PROTESTERS THAT THE
DECISION TO DISMANTLE THEIR
CAMPS IN CAIRO IS IRREVERSIBLE.
>> WE ASKEDHEM T ONCE MORE TO
LEAVE QUICKLY AND RETURN TO
THEIR HOMES AND WORK WITHOUT
RESISTANCE.
THOSE WHO DO NOT HAVE BLOOD ON
THEIR HANDS, THE STATE PROMISES
TO PROVIDE THEM WITH FREE
TRANSPORTATION.
THE CABINET WARNS AGAINST THE
CONTINUING DANGEROUS ESCALATION
AND INASSIGNMENT FROM AMONG THE
BROTHER HOODS.
>> Holman: THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD REJECTED THE
WARNINGS, AND SAID PROTESTERS
ARE NOT CONCERNED ABOUT TALK OF
CLEARING THEIR SIT-INS BY FORCE.
A SMALL FIRE GOT OUT OF CONTROL
TODAY AT KENYA'S MAIN AIRPORT IN
NAIROBI, THE BUSIEST IN EAST
AFRICA.
THE EXTENSIVE DAMAGE GROUNDED
INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS AND ROILED
SCHEDULES ACROSS THE CONTINENT.
THE ENTIRE AIRPORT WAS CLOSED
FOR A TIME, AS FIREFIGHTERS
BATTLED THE BLAZE.
INBOUND FLIGHTS WERE REROUTED TO
THE COASTAL CITY OF MOMBASA.
WHEN THE AIRPORT RE-OPENED
LATER, IT WAS ONLY FOR DOMESTIC
AND CARGO FLIGHTS.
KENYAN OFFICIALS ANNOUNCED PLANS
TO CONVERT A DOMESTIC FLIGHT
AREA INTO AN INTERNATIONAL
TERMINAL.
>> FROM TOMORROW WE WILL BE
PREPARING THIS UNIT, UNIT THREE
AS AN INTERNATIONAL TERMINAL FOR
DEPARTURE AND ARRIVAL WE HAVE
STARTED PITCHING TENTS ON THE
AIR SIDE FOR HANDLING DEPARTING
PASSENGERS.
>> Holman: THE CAUSE OF THE
BLAZE WAS UNDER INVESTIGATION,
BUT OFFICIALS SAID THERE WAS NO
INITIAL INDICATION OF TERRORISM.
TENSIONS BETWEEN THE TWO KOREAS
EASED SOMEWHAT TODAY.
COMMUNIST NORTH KOREA ANNOUNCED
IT IS REOPENING AN INDUSTRIAL
PARK THAT IS RUN JOINTLY WITH
SOUTH KOREA.
THE PARK CLOSED IN MID-APRIL
AMID THREATS BY THE NORTH TO
RETALIATE AGAINST WASHINGTON AND
SEOUL FOR INTERNATIONAL
SANCTIONS.
FORMAL TALKS ON FUTURE
OPERATIONS AT THE INDUSTRIAL
SITE ARE SCHEDULED TO BEGIN
AUGUST 14.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
LOST 48 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,470.
THE NASDAQ FELL 11 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,654.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: PRESIDENT OBAMA
RETURNED TO THE TOPIC OF HOUSING
TODAY.
MARGARET WARNER HAS THAT.
>> Warner: THE PRESIDENT TODAY
VOWED TO PUSH CONGRESS TO PASS
BROAD HOUSING REFORM BY THE END
OF THE YEAR.
ONE OF HIS KEY PROPOSALS: WIND
DOWN THE ROLES OF FREDDIE MAC
AND FANNIE MAE.
THE TWO MASSIVE MORTGAGE FINANCE
COMPANIES TAKEN OVER BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN THE DEPTHS
OF THE HOUSING CRISIS.
IN PHOENIX YESTERDAY, HE
ENDORSED A SENATE PROPOSAL TO--
QUOTE--  "END FREDDIE AND FANNIE
AS WE KNOW THEM:"
>> FIRST, PRIVATE CAPITAL SHOULD
TAKE A BIGGER ROLE IN THE
MORTGAGE MARKET.
I BELIEVE THAT WHILE OUR HOUSING
SYSTEM MUST HAVE A LIMITED
GOVERNMENT ROLE, PRIVATE LENDING
SHOULD BE THE BACKBONE OF THE
HOUSING MARKET, INCLUDING
COMMUNITY-BASED LENDERS WHO VIEW
THEIR BORROWERS NOT AS A NUMBER,
BUT AS A NEIGHBOR.
>> Warner: FREDDIE AND FANNIE
HAVE BEEN IN GOVERNMENT
RECEIVERSHIP SINCE FAILING
NEARLY FIVE YEARS AGO...
COSTING THE GOVERNMENT $187
BILLION TO BAIL THEM OUT.
NOW THEY ARE TURNING A PROFIT..
AND ARE ON TRACK TO FULLY REPAY
THAT AMOUNT BY 2014.
TWO OUT OF EVERY THREE NEW HOME
MORTGAGES TODAY ARE GUARANTEED
BY FREDDIE AND FANNIE, 68% OF
THE MARKET.
TO EXPLAIN HOW WOULD THE
CHANGE THAT LANDSCAPE
WE TURN TO GUY CECALA
PUBLISHER OF "INSIDE MORTGAGE
FINANCE"...
A HOUSING INDUSTRY RESEARCH
PUBLICATION.
WELCOME MR. CECALA.
THE PRESIDENT HAS BEEN TALKING
SINCE TAKING OFFICE IN 2009
ABOUT REVIVING THE HOUSING AND
MORTGAGE MARKET.
DO YOU SEE THESE STATEMENTS THIS
WEEK AS SIGNIFICANT.
>> YES.
THE FIRST TIME IN SEVERAL YEARS
THAT WE'VE HEARD POSITION
ADVANCED BY THE WHITEHOUSE AND
SOMEWHAT SIGNIFICANT IN THAT
HE'S TALKING ABOUT SPECIFICALLY
CHANGING THE EXISTING SYSTEM WE
HAVE OF CLOSING DOWN FANNIE MAE
AND FREDDIE MAC AND COMING UP
WITH SOMETHING TO REPLACE THEM
BUT MAINTAINING SOME SORT OF
GOVERNMENT PRESENCE IN THE
HOUSING MARKET.
>> Warner:  HOW WOULD THAT
WORK.
HE'S NOT PROPOSING ENDING ALL
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES IS THAT
RIGHT.
>> YES.
HE'S TALKING ABOUT A SENATE
PROPOSAL WHICH IS BIPARTISAN AT
LEAST IN THE SENATE THAT TALKS
ABOUT SETTING UP A FEDERAL
MORTGAGE INSURANCE CORPORATION
THAT WOULD OPERATE SOMEWHAT LIKE
THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE
CORPORATION IN THAT IT WOULD
COLLECT MONEY FROM LENDERS AND
IN RETURN GIVE THEM A GOVERNMENT
GUARANTEE.
>> Warner:  IT WOULD BE FEES
PAID.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Warner:  EXPLICITLY.
WHAT IS THE THINKING BEHIND THIS
AS TO HOW THIS WOULD PREVENT THE
KIND OF UNSCRUPULOUS LENDING TO
UNQUALIFIED BORROWERS THAT
REALLY PRECIPITATED THE WHOLE
HOUSING CRISES?
>> WELL THE LEGISLATION
SPECIFICALLY SAYS THE ONLY TYPE
OF MORTGAGES THAT CAN GO INTO
THESE NEW SECURITIES INSURED BY
THE FEDERAL MORTGAGE INSURANCE
CORPORATION WOULD BE SUPER SAFE.
THEY WOULD HAVE TO BE, COULDN'T
HAVE ANY FEATURES THAT WERE
CONSIDERED PREDATORY OR
ANTI-CONSUMER.
SO THEY WOULD BE THE SAFEST
MORTGAGES THAT WE'D HAVE.
>> Warner:  WE'RE REALLY
TALKING ABOUT TIGHTER
REGULATION.
>> IT'S TIGHTER REGULATION BUT
IT'S MODELED AFTER THE
DODD-FRANK ACT AND IT'S PRETTY
MUCH A REGULATION THAT THE
CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION
BUREAU HAS ALREADY FINALIZED AND
PUT IN PLACE TO TAKE EFFECT IN
EARLY 2014.
>> Warner:  NOW HASN'T TIGHTER
STANDARDS ALREADY BEEN PUT IN
PLACE JUST ANECDOTALLY.
THERE ARE MANY REPORTS ABOUT HOW
MUCH MORE DOCUMENTATION IS
REQUIRED.
>> IT'S A COMBINATION OF THINGS.
CERTAINLY THE STANDARDS ARE
TIGHTER THAT WOULD BE PUT IN
PLACE BY GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
TO SOME EXTENT REGULATORS.
>> Warner:  DOES THAT INCLUDE
FREDDIE AND FANNIE.
>> YES, EXACTLY.
IS ISSUE TOO IS LENDERS ARE
IMPOSING SUFFER STANDARDS ON TOP
OF THOSE BECAUSE THEY'RE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE LOSSES
THEY'VE BEEN ASKED TO COMPENSATE
THE GOVERNMENT FOR.
FANNIE AND FREDDY IS REQUIRED IN
THE BUY BACK MORTGAGES, HUD AND
THE FHA TO INDEMNIFY THEM FROM
LOSSES.
THEY WANT TO MAKE THE MORTGAGES
AS SAFE AS POSSIBLE INSTEAD OF
HAVING A 650 CREDIT SCORE LET'S
ASK FOR A 750 CREDIT SCORE THAT
TYPE OF THING.
>> Warner:  HAV'T TENHERE BEEN
PEOPLE BEEN ARGUING THAT'S
ACTUALLY A GOOD THING.
>> IT'S A GOOD THING IF YOU WANT
SUPER SAFE MORTGAGE MARKET
ENVIRONMENT BUT YOU'RE ALSO
TALKING ABOUT A MUCH SMALLER
POOL OF AMERICANS WHO ARE
QUALIFYING TO BUY A HOME.
>> Warner:  EVEN NOW YOU'RE
SAYING.
>> YES, EXACTLY.
YOU KNOW, COMPARED TO 2005 OR
2006 WE'RE TALKING 30 TO 40% LE.
>> Warner:  OUR PRIVATE BANKS
ARE COMMERCIAL BANKS INTERESTED
DO YOU THINK IN EXTENDING
MORTGAGE LOANS.
IS THAT PRIVATE MARKET THAT
CURRENTLY INTERESTED, IT'S A
PRIVATE SECURITIES MARKET
INTERESTED IN BUYING AND SELLING
MORTGAGE BACKED SECURITIES LIKE
FANNIE AND FREDDY DO WITHOUT
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES.
>> THERE IS A NON-AGENCY
MORTGAGED BACK SECURITIES MARKET
THAT EXIST NOW BUT IT'S A
FRACTION OF THE SIZE OF THE
GOVERNMENT MORTGAGE SECURITIES
MARKET AND IT'S BECAUSE IT
DOESN'T HAVE A GOVERNMENT
GUARANTEE AND INVESTORS ARE VERY
SKITTISH SINCE THE SUB-PRIME
CRISES AND EVERYTHING ELSE THAT
IF THEY BUY THESE SECURITIES
THAT THERE WILL BE LOSSES ON
THEM.
>> Warner:  AND SO ARE YOU
SAYING THAT THERE'S QUESTION OUT
THERE JUST AMONG THE INDUSTRY
YOU COVER ABOUT WHETHER THE
PRIVATE INDUSTRY WOULD STEP UP
TO THEM.
>> THERE CERTAINLY IS AND THAT'S
WHY WHAT OBAMA IS ENDORSING
ESSENTIALLY IS MAINTAINING A
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEE BUT HAVING
IT AS CATASTROPHIC INSURANCE
EFFECTIVELY AND THAT'S PRIVATE
LENDERS WOULD HAVE TO STEP UP
AND PAY A CERTAIN LEVEL OF THE
FIRST LOSSES.
BUT THE SECURITY THEY WOULD BE
SELLING WOULD HAVE A COMPLETE
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEE.
>> Warner:  SO WHAT WOULD THIS
MEAN FOR CONSUMERS?
WOULD BE BORROWERS WOULD BE
SELLERS.
>> IN THEORY IT MEANS THAT
INTEREST RATES ARE PROBABLY
GOING TO BE HIGHER THAN THEY
NORMALLY WOULD BE.
FREDDIE AND FANNIE MAINTAINED A
HUGE MORTGAGE SECURITIES MARKET,
THEY PURCHASED THEM, THEY
PROVIDED FOR A LOT OF LIQUIDITY.
YOU CERTAINLY WOULDN'T HAVE THAT
AT LEAST NOT INITIALLY IN THAT.
SO THAT WOULD PROBABLY RESULT IN
HIGHER INTEREST RATES.
>> Warner:  WOULD THERE ALSO
BE HIGHER FEES ACTUALLY FROM
BORROWING?
>> PROBABLY NOT BECAUSE RIGHT
NOW BORROWERS DON'T REALIZE IT
BUT LENDERS PAY A FEE TO FANNIE
MAE AND FREDDIE MAC TO
GUARANTEES MORTGAGES AND THAT
FEE IS ALWAYS PASSED RIGHT ON TO
BORROWERS.
>> Warner:  WHAT WOULD BE SO
DIFFERENT.
IF THEY'RE ALREADY PAYING THESE
FEES NOW?
>> IT WOULD BE THE VALUE OF THE
SECURITIES THEMSELVES AND HOW
MUCH THAT WOULD EFFECTIVELY
FETCH IN THE SECURITIES MARKET
BY OTHER INVESTORS.
>> Warner:  LET ME GO BACK TO
SOMETHING THAT THE PRESIDENT
SAID HE WANTED TO PRESERVE AND
THAT IS THE 30-YEAR FIXED RATE
MORTGAGE.
ACTUALLY A LOT OF MORE PEOPLE
WOULD TURN TO AFTER THE HOUSING
LEVEL BURST.
WHAT'S THE FUTURE OF THAT UNDER
THIS NEW SYSTEM?
>> THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS WHY
I THINK THE PRESIDENT'S
SUPPORTING SOME ROLE FOR THE
GOVERNMENT BECAUSE IT WOULD BE
VERY HARD TO PRESERVE THE
30-YEAR FIXED RATE MORTGAGE
UNLESS YOU CAN PACKAGE IT INTO A
MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITY THAT
HAD A GOVERNMENT GUARANTEE AND
THAT INVESTORS WOULD WANT.
BECAUSE LET'S FACE IT, INTEREST
RATES ARE PROBABLY RISING OVER
THE NEXT FEW YEARS AND MOST
PEOPLE, BANKS, DON'T WANT TO
HOLD A FIXED RATE MORTGAGE ON
THEIR BOOKS THEY WOULD RATHER
HAVE AN ADJUSTABLE RATE
MORTGAGE.
>> Warner:  VERY BRIEFLY AS A
VETERAN OF WATCHING THESE
BATTLES OVER FANNIE AND FREDDY
OVER THESE YEARS, HOW DO YOU
ASSESS THE PROSPECTS ON THE
HILL.
>> SLIM.
THIS IS GOING TO BE
CONTROVERSIAL.
THE REPUBLICANS IN THE HOUSE
HAVE ALREADY STAKED OUT A
POSITION THEY DON'T WANT ANY
GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT IN THE
MORTGAGE MARKET GOING FORWARD.
THEY LIKE THE IDEA OF WINDING
DOWN FANNIE AND FREDDY BUT THEY
DON'T WANT ANYTHING TO REPLACE
IT.
>> Warner:  GUY CECALA, THANK
YOU.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Ifill: IT'S BEEN 23 YEARS
SINCE THE "AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT" BECAME LAW.
JUDY WOODRUFF REPORTS ON THE
ADVANCES AND THE SETBACKS IN THE
CONTINUED FIGHT TO IMPLEMENT THE
LANDMARK LEGISLATION.
>> Reporter: FIVE DAYS A WEEK,
54-YEAR-OLD RICARDO THORNTON CAN
BE FOUND AT WASHINGTON D.C.'S
MARTIN LUTHER KING JUNIOR
MEMORIAL LIBRARY.
BORN IN THE DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, HE HAS WORKED HERE FOR
MORE THAN THREE DECADES.
AND HIS FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT IS
JUST ONE OF THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS
THORNTON HAS USED TO RISE ABOVE
A LABEL PLACED ON HIM AS A
CHILD.
>> I AM A PERSON WITH MENTAL
RETARDATION.
WHEN YOU HAVE THAT LABEL, WHERE
EVER YOU GO, "OH HE HAS A
DISABILITY, IT'S MENTAL."
OH, COME ON YOU GOING TO BE WITH
HIM?
THAT KIND OF TRUST WASN'T THERE.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THORNTON
MOVED INTO A TWO-BEDROOM HOUSE
IN WASHINGTON WITH HIS WIFE
DONNA OF 29 YEARS, WHO ALSO HAS
A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY.
WHILE THEY STILL RECEIVE SOME
SUPPORT FOR DAILY LIVING NEEDS
AND LIGHT SUPERVISION FROM A
NOT-FOR-PROFIT AGENCY, HAVING A
PLACE OF THEIR OWN WAS A DREAM
COME TRUE.
THEY HAD LIVED IN SMALL
APARTMENTS FOR MORE THAN 20
YEARS, WHERE THEY RAISED THEIR
SON.
SO WHAT DOES IT MEAN NOW TO HAVE
YOUR OWN HOME?
TO BE ON YOUR OWN?
>> IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
IT MEANS THAT I'M PART OF A
COMMUNITY THAT LOVES ME.
>> Reporter: THORNTON HAD A MUCH
DIFFERENT LIVING SITUATION AS A
CHILD AND YOUNG ADULT.
MOVING THROUGH VARIOUS
INSTITUTIONS FOR THOSE WITH
DISABILITIES.
>> SOME WERE TREATED BAD AND
SOME WERE TREATED GOOD.
YOU KNOW, I FELT THAT I WAS
BEING THAT I COMMITTED A CRIME
AND I'M DOING TIME FOR A CRIME I
NEVER COMMITTED.
AND WHY?
>> Reporter: THAT EXPERIENCE WAS
COMMON BEFORE THE "AMERICANS
WITH DISABILITIES ACT" WAS
SIGNED INTO LAW 23 YEARS AGO BY
PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W. BUSH.
THE CIVIL RIGHTS MEASURE MADE IT
ILLEGAL TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES,
INCLUDING BY UNNECESSARILY
FORCING THEM TO LIVE IN
SEGREGATED SETTINGS IN ORDER TO
ACCESS GOVERNMENT SERVICES.
BUT THE STATES, WHO HAVE MUCH OF
THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROVIDE
CARE FOR THOSE WITH
DISABILITIES, MOVED SLOWLY TO
COMPLY.
THAT'S BECAUSE OF LIMITED FUNDS
AND-- WHAT EXPERTS SAY-- IS A
LINGERING BIAS.
JENNIFER MATHIS, DIRECTOR OF
PROGRAMS AT THE BAZELON CENTER
FOR MENTAL HEALTH LAW IN
WASHINGTON.
>> CHANGE IS HARD.
BECAUSE YOU HAVE YEARS AND YEARS
OF SERVICE SYSTEMS THAT WERE
PREMISED ON A DIFFERENT VISION
ABOUT THE CAPABILITIES OF PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES THAT DIDN'T
ENVISION PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES AS LIVING REGULAR
LIVES THE SAME KINDS OF LIVES
THAT THE REST OF US, HAVING
FAMILIES, HAVING JOBS.
>> Reporter: SO EVEN AFTER THE
A.D.A. BECAME LAW, MANY PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES WERE NOT BEING
MOVED BY THE STATES OUT OF LARGE
INSTITUTIONS AND INTO HOMES AND
COMMUNITY-BASED PROGRAMS.
IN RESPONSE, IN 1999, THE
SUPREME COURT HANDED DOWN THE
"OLMSTEAD DECISION," REAFFIRMING
THE A.D.A.'S INTEGRATION
MANDATE.
IT HELD THAT UNJUSTIFIED
SEGREGATION CONSTITUTES
DISCRIMINATION.
AND IT SERVED TO PUSH STATES
INTO COMPLIANCE.
14 YEARS LATER, THE PICTURE HAS
IMPROVED.
STATES HAVE MADE PROGRESS
NATIONALLY AND THEY HAVE REDUCED
THE SHARE OF MEDICAID SPENDING
FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES LIVING IN
INSTITUTIONS LIKE NURSING HOMES
AND SPECIAL HOSPITALS.
BUT AS SENATOR TOM HARKIN, WHO
CO-AUTHORED THE A.D.A.,
DISCOVERED THROUGH A NEW REPORT
HE COMMISSIONED, MOST STATES ARE
STILL NOT PROVIDING THE HOME AND
COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES NEED.
>> THIS IS A CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUE,
NOT A SOCIAL WELFARE ISSUE.
AND SO STATES SEE IT AS A SOCIAL
WELFARE ISSUE, THEY HAVE A HOLD-
OVER BIAS OF
INSTITUTIONALIZATION AND NURSING
HOMES HAVE POWERFUL LOBBIES--
CAN I ADD THAT-- IN THE STATES.
SO THINGS TEND TO GO ON LIKE
THEY'VE ALWAYS BEEN GOING ON.
>> Reporter: THE REPORT HARKIN
COMMISSIONED FOUND THAT:
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
REMAIN ON WAITING LISTS FOR HOME
AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES.
PEOPLE YOUNGER THAN 65 ARE BEING
ISOLATED IN NURSING HOMES WITH
WIDE DISPARITIES FROM STATE TO
STATE.
AND IT'S HAPPENING EVEN THOUGH
THERE'S OVERWHELMING EVIDENCE
THAT FINDS HOME AND COMMUNITY
CARE COSTS LESS THAN
INSTITUTIONAL CARE.
HARKIN COMPARES THE SITUATION
FACING THOSE WITH DISABILITIES
TO RACIAL DISCRIMINATION.
>> THINK ABOUT SEGREGATION.
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES ARE
STILL SEGREGATED IN OUR SOCIETY
AND THAT'S WRONG.
IT'S WRONG MORALLY, ITS WRONG
ECONOMICALLY, AND IT'S WRONG IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THE AMERICANS
WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
I THINK WE NEED TO HAVE A
FEDERAL DETERMINATION THAT THAT
PERSON HAS THAT FEDERALLY
PROTECTED RIGHT.
>> Reporter: DIANE ROWLAND
STUDIES MEDICAID SPENDING AS THE
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
KAISER FAMILY FOUNDATION.
SHE SAYS MOST STATES HAVE BEGUN
TO MOVE IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION,
BUT THEY OFTEN FIND THEY ARE
CONSTRAINED BY LIMITED
RESOURCES.
>> WE HAVEN'T SEEN AS MUCH
THERE WAS ALSO AN ESCAPE CLAUSE
THAT WAS PART OF THE OLMSTEAD
DECISION THAT SAID THAT
BUDGETARY PRESSURE AT THE STATE
LEVEL COULD BE TAKEN INTO
ACCOUNT INTO DEVELOPING THE
PLANS FOR MOVING FORWARD.
SO YOU'VE ALWAYS HAD THIS
TENSION BETWEEN WHAT IS RIGHT,
WHAT IS A RIGHT OF THE
INDIVIDUALS AND WHETHER THE
STATE HAS THE FISCAL CAPACITY
AND IMPLEMENTS IT IN THE FULLEST
FORM THAT IT WAS INTENDED.
>> Reporter: ROWLAND AND OTHERS
YET ANOTHER HURDLE: A BIG CHUNK
OF THE FUNDING FOR THOSE WITH
DISABILITIES COMES FROM STATE
MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
>> IT LEAVES VERY SERIOUS
VARIATIONS ACROSS THE STATES AND
DEPENDING ON WHERE YOU LIVE YOUR
OPTIONS MAY BE VERY DIFFERENT,
WHICH IS ONE OF THE HARSH
REALITIES OF THE WAY THE
MEDICAID PROGRAM OPERATES IN THE
STATES AND IT LEAVES PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES WHO WANT TO LEAVE
AN INSTITUTION NEEDING A STRONG
ADVOCATE TO HELP GET THEM OUT
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE SLOW
PROGRESS, JENNIFER MATHIS OF THE
BAZELON CENTER SAYS THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE IS
STEPPING UP ITS ROLE IN ENSURING
COMPLIANCE.
>> DURING THIS ADMINISTRATION
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT REALLY
MADE THIS ISSUE A PRIORITY AND
HAS AGGRESSIVELY, ASSERTIVELY
I THINK THAT STATES ARE STARTING
TO SEE THE INTEGRATION MANDATE
IN A DIFFERENT LIGHT THEN THEY
DID SAY SEVEN YEARS AGO.
WHERE I THINK THERE WASN'T A LOT
OF LAW, THERE WERE MANY FEWER
LAWSUITS.
>> Reporter: SENATOR HARKIN
INSISTS IT WILL TAKE MORE THAN
LAWSUITS, POSSIBLY NEW
LEGISLATION WITH STRONGER
ENFORCEMENT.
BUT HE SAYS PUBLIC ATTITUDES
ABOUT PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
HAVE TO CHANGE, TOO.
>> WE ARE ONE ACCIDENT AWAY, ONE
ILLNESS AWAY FROM BEING
DISABLED.
WE, THOSE WHO ARE NOT DISABLED,
WE HAVE TO START THINKING WOULD
WE WANT TO BE INSTITUTIONALIZED
IF THAT ACCIDENT HAPPENED TO US?
IF THAT ILLNESS HAPPENED TO US
AND NOW WE'RE DISABLED?
IS THAT WHAT WE WANT FOR
OURSELVES?
I TELL YOU, YOU ASK ANYONE THAT
WELL HOW ABOUT MAKING SURE WE
DON'T HAVE IT FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
DISABLED RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER LONG IT
TAKES, RICARDO THORNTON SAYS HE
WILL CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE FOR
CHANGE.
>> I FEEL THAT EVERYONE SHOULD
BE GIVEN AN OPPORTUNITY.
IT'S TIME FOR INSTITUTIONS TO
CLOSE.
IT'S TIME FOR NEW THINGS TO
HAPPEN.
THIS HOUSE HERE IS A BLESSING TO
US.
I GOT A WIFE, I LOVE HER AND I
HAVE A SON AND I'M SEEING HIM
GROW AND A FAMILY.
SO I'M REALLY ENJOYING LIFE AND
WANT TO SEE OTHER PEOPLE ENJOY
LIFE.
>> Reporter: THORNTON SAYS A BIG
PART OF ENJOYING LIFE IS HIS
WORK AT THE LIBRARY, ADDING HE
HAS NO PLANS TO RETIRE ANY TIME
SOON.
>> Brown: NOW, READING THE
THERMOSTAT TO PREDICT A VIOLENT
CLIMATE.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THE STORY.
>> Suarez:  HOT TEMPERATURES
AND CHANGES IN THE CLIMATE ARE
STRONGLY LINKED TO HUMAN
VIOLENCE.
THAT'S THE CONCLUSION OF A NEW
STUDY RECENTLY PUBLISHED IN THE
JOURNAL OF SCIENCE.
RESEARCHERS OF PRINCETON AND THE
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT
BERKLEY POURED THROUGH DATE OF
DATA FROM A VARIETY OF
DISCIPLINES.
THEY FOUND MODERATE INCREASES
MORE CHANGES IN RAINFALL
INCREASED CONFLICT ON ALL
LEVELS.
BOTH IN ANCIENT TIMES AND OUR
OWN.
IN WEALTHY SOCIETIES AND
DEVELOPING ONE.
SOLOMON IS THE LEAD AUTHOR OF
THE STUDY   AND HE JOINS ME NOW.
PROFESSOR I THINK WE'VE B
ACCUSTOMED IN RECENT YEARS TO
OBSERVING HOW WEATHER CHANGES
NATURAL SYSTEMS WHETHER IT'S
WATER WAYS OR MIGRATORY BIRD
PATTERNS OR INSECT ACTIVITY.
BUT HOW DO YOU MEASURE, HOW DO
YOU CORRELATE HUMAN BEHAVIOR TO
TEMPERATURE.
>> IN RECENT YEARS A VARIETY OF
RESEARCH GROUPS HAVE ASSEMBLED
REALLY USEFUL DATA SETS WHERE WE
HAVE RECORDS OF HOW MANY
CONFLICTS OCCURRED IN DIFFERENT
LOCATIONS.
IN SOME CASES WE'RE JUST LOOKING
AT THINGS LIKE THE FBI FILES
THAT RECORD HOW MANY ASSAULTS OR
RAPES OR MURDERS HAPPEN IN THE
U.S. ON A GIVEN DAY.
WE LINK THAT KIND OF DATA TO
HISTORICAL DATA ON THE CLIMATE,
SO TEMPERATURE, RAINFALL.
AND WE TRY TO UNDERSTAND HOW A
CHANGE IN THE ENVIRONMENT CAN
LEAD TO HUMAN RESPONSE ON THE
GROUND.
>> Suarez:  SO SEE IF I
UNDERSTAND THIS CORRECTLY.
YOU'RE MEASURING A LOT OF
DIFFERENT KINDS OF HUMAN
RESPONSE BUT IS IT JUST THE
TEMPERATURE THAT COULD BE
FORCING THESE CHANGES?
I MEAN THE TEMPERATURE MAY HAVE
AN EFFECT ON HOW MUCH DRINKABLE
WATER THERE IS AROUND,
TEMPERATURE MAY HAVE AN EFFECT
ON  EAT
IN A GIVEN COMMUNITY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO THERE ARE IN FACT MANY
HYPOTHESES, MANY MECHANISMS THAT
PEOPLE THINK MIGHT HELP CONNECT
CHANGES IN THE ENVIRONMENT,
CHANGES IN THE TEMPERATURE OR
EXTREME RAINFALL.
THE CONFLICT OUTCOMES THAT WE
OBSERVE.
SOMETIMES WE THINK DIRECT
EXPOSURE TO HEAT SOMETIMES DOES
CHANGE HUMAN PSYCHOLOGY.
WE OBSERVED IN THE LABORATORY IF
YOU PUT PEOPLE IN A ROOM AND
RAISE THE TEMPERATURE THEY
ACTUALLY CHANGE HOW THEY BEHAVE
TOWARDS OTHERS.
AS YOU SUGGEST THERE'S ECONOMIC
MECHANISMS AS WELL THAT ARE
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT.
SO YOU CAN HAVE CROP FAILURES
AND EXTREMELY HIGH TEMPERATURES
AND THAT LEADS TO ALL SORTS OF
CHANGES, CHANGES PEOPLE'S
INSENTIVES TO PERFORM IN THE
LABOR MARKET IN COMPARISON TO
MORE VIOLENT ACTIVITIES AND IT
ALSO CHANGES HOW PEOPLE MIGRATE,
SEE PRICES AND ALL THOSE THINGS
CAN HAVE AN INFLUENCE ON HUMAN
CONFLICT WHICH IS A VERY COMPLEX
PHENOMENA.
>> Suarez:  IS THERE AN AMOUNT
OF INCREASE WHERE YOU SEE THINGS
INTENSIFY OR START TO TAKE OFF.
IS THERE A THRESHOLD WHERE YOU
SEE YOUR OBSERVABLE RESULTS MORE
STRONGLY?
>> SO IT TURNS OUT WHEN WE LOOK
AT TEMPERATURE, IT ACTUALLY
LOOKS AS THOUGH THE RELATIONSHIP
IS PRETTY CONTINUOUS.
SO PRETTY MUCH WHEREVER YOU ARE
IN THE MODERN WORLD, WE TEND TO
OBSERVE THAT EVEN INCREASING THE
TEMPERATURE BY A LITTLE BIT
LEADS TO HIGHER LEVELS OF
CONFLICT.
BUT IF WE LOOK AT RAINFALL DATA,
THERE DOES TEND TO BE THESE SORT
OF THRESHOLD EFFECTS WHERE VERY
EXTREMELY HIGH LEVELS OF
RAINFALL OR EXTREMELY LOW LEVELS
OF RAINFALL TEND TO BE DAMAGING.
THAT'S CONSISTENT WITH THE
ECONOMIC IDEA YOU'VE BEEN
POINTING OUT PARTICULARLY
BECAUSE EXTREME RAINFALL IS VERY
BAD FOR AGRICULTURE.
>> Suarez:  IT'S INTERESTING
THAT YOU TRY TO DO THIS
RETROSPECTIVELY.
IS THERE RELIABLE ENOUGH DATA
BOTH ON HUMAN ACTIVITY AND ON
THE NATURAL WORLD TO LOOK BACK
INTO THE PAST AND SAY UH-HUH,
HERE'S A TIME WHERE RISING
TEMPERATURES CAN BE CORRELATED
WITH INCREASED HUMAN VIOLENCE?
>> DATA QUALITY IS ALWAYS AN
ISSUE WHENEVER YOU DO ANY SORT
OF RETROSPECTIVE STUDY.
WE LOOKED ACROSS 60 STUDIES AND
SOME OF THEM GO WAY BACK IN
TIME, THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
BUT HALF THE STUDIES COME FROM
THE MODERN ERA.
THESE ARE STUDIES OF DATA WHERE
THE POPULATIONS THAT ARE BEING
OBSERVED ARE POPULATIONS FROM
1980 TO THE PRESENT.
IN THOSE SITUATIONS, WE THINK
THE DATA IS A VERY HIGH QUALITY.
AND WE ARE ABLE TO ACTUALLY
OBSERVE STRONGER ASSOCIATIONS
LIKE YOU SUGGEST.
>> Suarez:  OTHER EXAMPLES OF
THE OPPOSITE, PLACES THAT
LITERALLY COOL OFF WHEN THEY
COOL OFF?
>> SO, YES.
WHEN WE LOOK AT THESE SORTS OF
RELATIONSHIPS, WHAT WE'RE
ACTUALLY SAYING IS THAT HIGHER
TEMPERATURES TEND TO BE WORSE,
COOLER TEMPERATURES TEND TO BE
BETTER.
IN THE MODERN WORLD.
IF WE GO BACK TO THE TIME IN
EUROPE DURING THE ICE AGE FOR
EXAMPLE YOU'LL SEE THAT COLD
EVENTS DURING THESE COLD EPOCHS
AND COLD LOCATIONS ALSO TENDED
TO LEAD TO MORE CONFLICT BETWEEN
POPULATIONS.
THAT SEEMS TO BE A GENERAL
PATTERN THROUGH MANY STUDIES
THAT LOOK BACK IN TIME FAR
ENOUGH.
IN THE MODERN WORLD WE'RE NOT IN
THAT KIND OF ICE AGE AND WE TEND
TO SEAT HIGHER TEMPERATURES.
>> Suarez:  CONFLICT IS A
PRETTY BIG WORD AND I SUSPECT A
LOT OF THINGS COULD LIVE UNDER
THAT BROAD UMBRELLA.
WHAT KIND OF EFFECTS WERE YOU
LOOKING FOR WHEN YOU WERE
LOOKING FOR THINGS TO MEASURE.
JUST THE EXAMPLES OF ASSAULT,
CRIMES, MURDERS?
WHAT EXACTLY IS CONFLICT.
>> SO WHEN WE WERE TRYING TO
LOOK AT ALL DIFFERENT TYPES OF
HUMAN CONFLICT, SORT OF ORGANIZE
IT AND HELP US UNDERSTAND BETTER
WHAT ARE THE GENERAL PATTERNS,
WE BROKE CONFLICT DOWN INTO
THREE TYPE OF CONFLICTS.
WE LOOK AT INTERPERSONAL
CONFLICT, THE CONTHORACIC
BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS, THINGS LIKE
MURDER, ASSAULT, RAPE, DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE.
THEN WE ALSO LOOKED AT
INTERGROUP CONFLICT.
THAT CONFLICT BETWEEN GROUPS OF
POPULATIONS.
SOMETIMES THOSE COULD BE ETHNIC,
RIOTS.
THOSE COULD BE THINGS LIKE
POLITICAL OPPRESSION OR CIVIL
CONFLICTS.
THEN THERE'S A THIRD AND VERY
EXTREME CATEGORY THAT WE LOOKED
AT WHICH IS REALLY THE COLLAPSE
OF CIVILIZATION AND THE BREAK
DOWN OF GOVERNING INSTITUTIONS.
NOW VERY FEW OF THOSE EVENTS
HAVE OCCURRED IN MODERN TIMES
BUT THOSE SCENARIOS ARE
PARTICULARLY INTERESTING BECAUSE
THEY SORT OF REPRESENT EXTREME
SCENARIOS.
YOU CAN THINK OF THINGS LIKE THE
COLLAPSE OF THE MAYAN EMPIRE OR
OTHER EMPIRES AROUND THE WORLD
THAT COINCIDED WITH EXTREME
THINGS.
>> Suarez:  SOLOMON THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE BACK SHORTLY
WITH A CONVERSATION WITH THE
DIRECTOR OF "FRUITVALE STATION."
BUT FIRST: THIS IS PLEDGE WEEK
ON PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
>> Ifill: OSCAR GRANT'S NAME MAY
NEVER HAVE BEEN KNOWN IF HE HAD
NOT BEEN KILLED JUST HOURS INTO
THE NEW YEAR OF 2009.
NOW, THE STORY OF THE 22-YEAR-
OLD MAN, WHO'D SPENT NEW YEAR'S
EVE CELEBRATING WITH FRIENDS IN
SAN FRANCISCO, HAS BECOME THE
SUBJECT OF A CRITICALLY
ACCLAIMED NEW FILM "FRUITVALE
STATION."
GRANT, WHO WAS UNARMED, WAS SHOT
DEAD BY A POLICE OFFICER ON AN
OAKLAND RAIL PLATFORM.
THE FICTIONALIZED ACCOUNT
FOLLOWS HIM THROUGH HIS LAST
DAY.
>> FIVE, FOUR, THREE, TWO, ONE.
>> WH ISO H
>> WHAT IS GOING ON?
>> HEY, OSCAR.
HOW ARE YOU.
>> GOOD, I'M GOOD.
HAPPY NEW YEAR.
>> HAPPY NEW YEAR.
>> OSCAR.
OSCAR FROM ...
>> GET OFF THE TRAIN NOW.
>> ARE YOU STILL ON THE TRAIN.
>> WHY DON'T YOU TELL ME WHAT IS
GOING ON?
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?
WHAT ARE YOU DOING.
>> OH MY GOSH.
>> THAT WON'T BE GOOD, WON'T BE
GOOD.
RYAN COOGLER WROTE AND DIRECTED
FRUITVALE STATION.
IT IS HIS FIRST AND FEATURE
LENGTH FILM.
HE JOIRNZ US FROM SAN FRANCISCO.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
YOU TELL US ABOUT A POLARIZING
STORY IN A HUMANIZING WAY ABOUT
THIS INDIVIDUAL OSCAR GRANT.
WHY DO YOU CHOOSE TO TELL HIS
STORY THIS WAY?
>> FOR ME WHAT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO TELL A STORY FROM
THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE PEOPLE
THAT KNEW HIM THE BEST.
AFTER THE SITUATION HAPPENED AND
OSCAR LOST HIS LIFE, IT BECAME
VERY POLITICIZED.
PEOPLE SHOULD HAVE KNOWN WHAT HE
WAS AND MANY WAYS MADE HIM WHAT
THEY WANTED HIM TO BE.
SOME PEOPLE WANTED TO MAKE HIM
OUT TO BE A SAINT AND MARTYR.
HE BECAME A SYMBOL FOR WHATEVER
REASONS THEY HAD.
AND OTHER PEOPLE WANTED TO MAKE
HIM JUST EVERY BAD MISTAKE HE
MADE IN HIS LIVE AS JUST A
CRIMINAL OR A FELON HE'S JUST A
DRUG DEALER AND GOT WHAT HE
DESERVED ON THAT PLATFORM.
FOR ME IT WAS SOMETHING I WANTED
TO GIVE TO THE HEART OF THE
PEOPLE WHO NEW HIM THE BEST
BEFORE THIS SITUATION.
EVERY ONE OF US, EVERY HUMAN
BEING IN THE WORLD, JUST DOING
THEIR EVERY DAY LIVES, HIS MOM,
HIS GIRLFRIEND HIS DAUGHTER.
IT'S ALL VERY INTERESTING
TELLING THE STORY FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF ALL THE
RELATIONSHIPS.
>> Ifill:  YOU ARE YOURSELF AN
AFRICAN AMERICAN YOUNG MAN NOT
YET 30 YEARS OLD.
DID THIS STORY RESONATE WITH YOU
IN A VERY SPECIAL WAY.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I WAS BORN AND RAISED HERE MY
WHOLE LIFE AND  OSCAR WAS THE
SAME AGE WHEN HE WAS KILLED.
THE FIRST TIME YOU SAW THE
FOOTAGE I COULDN'T HELP TO THINK
HOW MUCH HE LOOKED LIKE ME AND
HIS FRIENDS LOOKED LIKE MY
FRIENDS.
I HAD THAT CLOSE PROXIMITY TO
THAT JUST FROM THE STANDPOINT
BEING FROM THE BAY AREA, LOOKING
LIKE THE GUY AND MOVING THROUGH
THE SAME SITUATION HE'S BEEN
THROUGH.
I THOUGHT ABOUT THEY HAVE A
PERSONAL LEAVE.
WHAT IF I DIDN'T MAKE IT HOME TO
THE PEOPLE I LOVED MOST IN MY
LIFE FROM MY VERY NECESSARY
SITUATION.
SO DEFINITELY AFFECTED ME.
>> Ifill:  AS A FILMMAKER YOU
HAD PRETTY AMAZING SUCCESS FIRST
TIME OUT OF THE BOX HERE AT SUN
DANCE, AT CAAN AND WONDEREDDED
IF YOU EXPECTED THIS TO READ ATE
WITH A BIGGER AUDIENCE.
>> HOW IT'S BEING RECEIVED AND
ACCEPTED BY AUDIENCES DOMESTIC
AND ABROAD.
FOR ME IT WAS ALWAYS ABOUT
MAKING SOMETHING THAT WAS VERY
PERSONAL TO MYSELF AND VERY
IMPORTANT.
IT WAS A STORY THAT HAD
RESONANCE IN THE BAY AREA HERE
WHERE OSCAR WAS FROM AND WHERE
IT TOOK PLACE.
IT WAS FOR ME AND ALL THE FILM
MAKERS INVOLVED TO REALLY TELL
THE STORY AS SPECIFIC AS WE
COULD AND HAD IT BE ABOUT
UNIVERSAL THINS.
IT'S ABOUT DRAMA RELATIONSHIPS.
EVERYBODY KNOWS WHAT IT LIKES TO
BE YOUNG AND MAYBE HAS DAMAGING
EFFECTS ON PEOPLE THEY HAVE
AROUND HIM WHICH WAS THE
SITUATION OSCAR WAS GOING
THROUGH.
IT'S LIKE PEOPLE WHO MEAN THE
WORLD TO YOU AND HOW IT HAS AN
EFFECT ON PEOPLE'S LIVES.
I THINK THEY ARE REALLY GETTING
TO THE HEART OF THAT STAVE IS
WHAT WE HOPE TO CONNECT WITH
PEOPLE OUTSIDE OF OSCAR'S
DEMOGRAPHIC.
WE HOPE THOSE THINGS WILL
HOPEFULLY CONNECT.
WE HAVE NO IDEA THEY WOULD.
>> Ifill:  TALKING ABOUT
OSCAR'S DEMOGRAPHIC WAS A WEEK
AFTER GEORGE ZIMMERMAN'S VERDICT
AND PEOPLE EVERYWHERE IN THE
THEATRE WHERE I WAS WAS SOBBING
WATCHING THIS FILM EVEN THOUGH
THEY KNOW HOW IT ENDED.
HOW THIS TRAYVON MARTIN AFFECTED
THE WAY PEOPLE SEE THIS FILM.
>> I CAN'T SPEAK TO THAT.
PROBABLY AS A FILM MAKER IT WAS
VERY IRONIC THAT THE VERDICT
CAME DOWN THE WEEK OUR FILM
BOUGHT RELEASED.
WE WERE WORKING ON THE FILM
BEFORE TRAYVON WAS KILLED, YOU
KNOW.
THAT TRAGEDY WOULDN'T HAVE
HAPPENED AND DEEPLY AFFECTED ME
BACK IN FEBRUARY, IT AFFECTED A
LOT OF PEOPLE AND I THINK THE
VERDICT HAD A SIMILAR AFFECT ON
A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT WAS TUNED
IN TO WATCHING IT.
BUT IT WASN'T IN OUR PLAN AT ALL
TO HAVE THE FILM BE COMING OUT
TO BE RELEASED AROUND THAT
MOMENT WHEN WE WERE WATCHING
THAT TRIAL AND IN MANY WAYS, I
THINK PEOPLE CAN SEE PARALLEL.
TO ME IT WAS ALWAYS ABOUT
OSCAR'S STORY'S ALWAYS ABOUT THE
LOSS OF ATTENTION OF THIS YOUNG
MAN'S LIFE.
SHOWING YOUNG AFRICAN AMERICAN
MALES LOSE THEIR LIFE TO
VIOLENCE INNTRY EVERY
DAY.
I THINK BECAUSE OF SOMETHING
THAT WAS IN THE MEDIA IT WAS A
SITUATION OF YOUNG AFRICAN
AMERICAN MEN LOSING THEIR LIFE
DREW PARALLELS THERE.
>> Ifill:  I FOUND THE MOVIE
VERY AFFECTING AND THANK YOU FOR
MAKING IT AND GOOD LUCK ON YOUR
NEXT PROJECT.
RYAN COOGLER, DIRECTOR AND
WRITER OF FRUITVALE STATION.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR HAVING
ME.
I REALLY APPRECIATE IT.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
PRESIDENT OBAMA SCRAPPED A
PLANNED SUMMIT IN SEPTEMBER WITH
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN.
IT CAME A WEEK AFTER MOSCOW
GRANTED ASYLUM TO EDWARD
SNOWDEN, THE NATIONAL SECURITY
AGENCY LEAKER.
EGYPT'S MILITARY-BACKED LEADERS
DECLARED FOREIGN EFFORTS TO
MEDIATE THE COUNTRY'S POLITICAL
CRISIS HAVE FAILED.
AND A MILITARY JUDGE AT FORT
HOOD, TEXAS, TEMPORARILY HALTED
THE COURT MARTIAL OF ARMY MAJOR
NIDAL HASAN.
HIS STANDBY ATTORNEY WARNED
HASAN IS DELIBERATELY TRYING TO
GET THE DEATH PENALTY.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, RUSTLING UP
RIVER MONSTERS FOR SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS THE DETAILS.
>> Holman: HELLBENDER
SALAMANDERS ARE LONG, FLAT,
SLIPPERY AMPHIBIANS
THAT HAVE BEEN AROUND FOR
MILLIONS OF YEARS, YET WE KNOW
VERY LITTLE ABOUT THEM.
A GROUP OF RESEARCHERS WRESTLES
THEM FROM RIVERBEDS IN THE HOPES
OF UNDERSTANDING THE POPULATION
AND WHAT IT CAN TELL US ABOUT
THEIR ENVIRONMENT.
READ OUR SCIENCE WEDNESDAY
REPORT.
AND FOR ALL YOU DOG LOVERS, WE
HAVE THE STORY-- ALONG WITH
PHOTOS-- OF A GOLDEN RETRIEVER
PILGRIMAGE TO THE SCOTTISH
HIGHLANDS, THE BIRTHPLACE OF THE
BREED.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
HOW CAN U.S. CITIES ENSURE
ECONOMIC HEALTH.
JOIN US FOR A TWITTER CHAT
TOMORROW AND WEIGH IN.
USE THE HASH TAG NEWSHOUR CHAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT WHY
GETTING OLD DOESN'T MEAN LEAVING
A CHERISHED LIFE BEHIND AS MORE
SENIORS AGE IN PLACE.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.